Hello and welcome to computing history episode 0, overview

One of the biggest challenges in talking about computing history is there
isn't just a single timeline. Instead, there's a series of independent timelines
that eventually merge together that make modern computing possible.

To illustrate all these different facets if you will we'll start with the
hopefully familiar example of taking a picture with a modern smartphone.

First let's look at the photographing technology itself.

When someone takes a photo with a smartphone, carefully manufactured
microscopic in size light sensors translate light into electrical signals,
separating it into millions of individual units we call pixels. It all
happens in miliseconds and the components to do it can be bought for less then a
days wage of an average western worker. Truly extraordinary. 
Here we get our first timeline.

Reliable, precise manufacturing methods using almost completely
error free materials able to produce millions of identical objects without
much fanfare has taken centuries of effort to get to. Modern computing
relies not only on these machines of production but the process, methodology and
quality control to do the production. The history of accurate reliable manufacturing
is crucial to the modern computer.

Now back to the smart phone.  After these well manufcatured sensors convert the light into
electricity, the electricity then traverses around small wires laid out on a 
circuit board. It visits various integrated circuits and can get duplicated,
rerouted, and transformed.  Really, the circuit board is like a tiny city with
the small wires being the roads or maybe, perhaps, the telephone lines. In
many ways, shuffling the electric signals around circuit boards isn't all that 
different then shuffling the signal of a phone call around to get to the final 
destination.

This technology, that of addressing, networking, and relaying messages started during the era of
telegraphs and really got off the ground with automatic switching of
telephones as in, those that didn't require an operator. The technical achivements in
these complex communication networks were crucial in the move from addresses with phone numbers to
addresses with electrons coming from, say a smartphone camera. And
coincidentally, the history of networked communications is the first timeline
we'll be going over, that starts in the 1700s.

Now let's take a closer look at what happens inside the little black
caterpillar looking integrated chips I briefly mentioned before. This is where
what most people call "computing" happens. Along with moving things around,
these chips do what can be called mechanized mathematics. That is to say the
work done inside these black boxes can be simplified down to a small handful
of building blocks implemented in tiny silicon machines.  These machines of
mathematics we call transistors can be traced back to earlier machines of
a different kind of mathematics, that is to say, mechanical calculators, which go back to the 
Renaissance. There were millions of these mechanical machines and they helped 
power the industrial age. That will be another timeline.

Now you may have noticed I said "different kind of mathematics". The kind of
math one chooses to synthesize mechanically it turns out really truly matters.
being able to configure a machine to that can solve more problems but uses
fewer and mechanically simpler parts to do it becomes crucial.  This all
started not in the garage of silicon valley dropouts but instead in university math
departments in the 1800s. Now don't worry, we aren't going to be doing any
actual math and there is no homework.  Instead, we'll see how mathematical
machines, described by elaborate equations, as a branch of research into pure
mathematics, that is to say theory without any specific application in mind,
were super important in describing the kind of math and logical constructions
were needed to get to modern computing.

Now going back to the photograph, yes, we are still talking about that. When
the processing is done, the phone places the electric signals, now a stream of
things we call a file, in storage. These days,
computer storage on a phone is yet another little black rectangle that cost
about as much as nice meal. 

That, however, is a very modern thing. Being able to store information for later use by a machine
has a long history. You may even have a machine with working storage in your 
home that hasn't significantly changed since the 1770s. I'm pretty sure everyone 
listening has held these machines in their hands, even fed the stored
information into the machine without even thinking about it. I'm talking about
a windup music box.  Does that count you may ask ... well the punchcard used a
similar mechanism as did the paper tape Paul Allen had with him when he
demonstrated Microsoft's first product in the 70s.  It most certainly counts. 
The history of storage, also important.

Taken together, all these technologies in our photo example wouldn't be very useful if the 
you couldn't conduct the smartphone to take the picture when you wanted. This is of course done
through software.  Software, roughly, is the ability to redefine the operation
of a machine after its manufacturing. There's a gray line really between
configuring say, a 19th century calculator to do a calculation and
programming. Especially if that calculator will punch out a paper record of
your calculations you can later feed back into it. The transition from manual
operation and configuration to the automation we call software and programming
is yet another crucial timeline in our story.

And finally if we are to purchase a computing machine we need to first get raw materials 
that have to be mined or salvaged. Then they have to be processed and assembled according to
careful designs and instructions refined over decades by thousands of people. Then software 
written by a different group of thousands of people is electronically placed
onto the machine. This is overseen by a long chain of human organizations in
many countries before it finally reaches our hands.  This is all quite
expensive. And it's only possible because of innovations in business and finance 
Series A, B, C financing, angel investors, startups, stock options, how  
someone with the right powerpoint can get a millions of dollars to do an
ambitious project, this hasn't always existed. In fact, many of
the ambitious early computing projects, such as those by Charles Babbage in
the 1800s, weren't completed due to a lack of financing. The business innovations to overcome
those costs and finance the project hadn't materialized yet. It can't be left
out.

Long before Apple and Microsoft and even before the code breaking machines of
World War 2, the computer revolution was taking shape in business,
communications, tabulation, recording, manufacturing, mathematics, and
reconfigurable systems. This series intends to go over all of them. Yes, all
of them, one by one, as long as it takes.

It is a large project and it has never been done before. So that is exactly
why I am doing it. Join me soon in episode 1.1 of computing history, the
victorian internet or as the victorians would have called it, the 

