
http://lateralscience.blogspot.com/2012/11/in-bed-with-boyle-claytons.html

"I wish to inform you of a new, but terrible experiment, which I advise you on no account personally to attempt. I am engaged in a research to determine the strength of electricity.
p519 A History of Electricity, (The Intellectual Rise in Electricity) from Antiquity to the Days of Benjamin Franklin – Park Benjamin
https://play.google.com/books/reader?id=hkMPAAAAMAAJ&hl=en&pg=GBS.PA519

http://www.sparkmuseum.com/FRICTION_HIST.HTM

Leyden Jar

In 1746, for example Abbe Nollet, there he is again, in order to try to measure the speed of electricity, got 200 monks to form a circle stretching over a mile. They each held iron rods between each other similarly to Grey's 2 boy experiments. Then Nollet discharged the leyden jar over the 200 monks and observers noted that all of them convulsed from the intense shock at nearly, but not exactly the same time, showing the electricity speed is finite, but extremely high.
Lessons in Electricity: To which is Added An Elementary Lecture on Magnetism by John Tyndall 1881

"It caused great wonder and dread, which arose chiefly from the excited imagination. Musschenbroek felt the shock, and declared in a letter to a friend that he would not take a second one for the crown of France.

Bleeding at the nose, ardent fever, a heaviness of head which endured for days, were all ascribed to the shock. Boze wished that he might die of it, so the he might enjoy the honor of having his death chronicled in the Paris' Academy of Science.


Curiosities of Science, Past and Present, A Book for Old and Young – John Timbs


In 1746, Nollet transmitted the charge of
a Leyden jar a distance of 900 toises [about 1(3/4) km].
To do so, he enlisted a community of monks to form a
circle, with iron wires connecting adjacent monks. At the
moment of discharge, all the monks jumped up 

“Extract of a Letter from Mr. Turbervill Needham to
Martin Folkes, Esq; Pr. R.S. concerning some new
electrical experiments lately made in Paris,” Philos.
Trans., London, vol. 44, pp. 247–263, 1746


My Respects to Mr. Watson. He desir’d you to enquire what Success we had in our Attempts to kill a Turkey by the Electrical Strokes.5 Please to acquaint him, that we made several Experiments on Fowls this Winter; That we found two large thin glass Jars, gilt (holding each about 6 Gallons, and taking 2000 Turns of a Globe of 9 Inches Diameter to charge them full, when the Globe works very well, and will charge a common half pint Vial with 50 Turns) were sufficient to kill common Hens outright; but the Turkies, tho’ thrown into violent Convulsions, and then lying as dead for some Minutes, would recover in less than a quarter of an Hour. However, having added Mr. Kinnersley’s Jarrs and mine together, in all 5, tho’ not fully charg’d, we kill’d a Turky with them of about 10 lb.wt. and suppose they would have kill’d a much larger. I conceit that the Birds kill’d in this Manner eat uncommonly tender.

Ludolph, electric shock party trick

So before we return to Leiden we'll be swinging by Berlin to visit Ewald George von Kleist who came up with something called, ok let's try this, Kliest chee fla sche, Kliest Flask, or Kliest Bottle, this will quickly be superceded within months. The best description I've found of this is from an 1881 text by Tyndall so indulge me for a bit:

Priestley says (" Discovery of Germans,
"
that Gordon
increased the electric sparks to such a degree that
they were felt from a man's head to his foot, so that a person could
hardly take them without falling down with giddiness; and small
birds were killed by them.
This he effected by conveying elec-
tricity, with iron wires, to the distance of 200 ells (about 250 yards)
is
from the place of excitation."

