Hello and welcome to computing history episode 1.2, the journey to the
electric wire.

Let's talk about electricity.

It's fast. In the 1700s it was considered to effectively be instantaneous.

Prior to our floating alphabetic rips of paper we discussed in 1.1, an early
scientist Stephen Grey, was responsible for the experiments we're
going to discuss today. Sorry, the telegraph promise will have to wait for a
future episode.

It's hard what to think about Stephen Grey. In A History of Science,
published in 1904, Henry Williams referred to him as an irascible old
pensioner. Over on Wikipedia one editor said that he was a shadow of his
adviser John Theophilus Desaguliers who stole the limelight over a supposed
factional difference

However if you read Desaguliers "A Dissertation Concerning Electricity", a
list of 24 different experiments to observe the phenomena of electricity, the
author speaks quite glowingly of Stephen Grey. Grey even lived with Desagulier
for about 4 years in the 1710s. In his later letters in the 1720s he speaks of
corresponding with Desagulier so it wasn't that bitter.

I like to think of him as an excited science nerd without social graces. A
Steve Urkel of 18th century London. He died a childless bachelor at the age of
70 spending at least 30 years publishing early science works spanning from
astronomy, optics, and most importantly electricity. He was never a rich man
and had to have someone else vouch for him or cover his dues at the royal
society, the place to go for science in the day. 

His relative impoverishment may have worked in his favor because being on a
small budget, his science experiments ended up being wickedly clever, using
pretty common things and thus easily repeatable. He inadvertently helped 
popularize science on a budget so an average person reading the early science journal could
go "hey wait a minute, I could try this out right now".

We'll be focusing on two letters he wrote in January and February
of 1731 that were published in Philisophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, a scientific journal that started in 1665.  Back then you could just write
a letter, in prose to Cromwell Mortimer, the secretary of the journal, in freeform
discribing your experiments.

He'd read over it and be like "eh, cool - doesn't look like nonsense" and it'd
be typeset and published in the next issue... and that's all it took. 

There wasn't a lot of social capital tied to being published in a
science journal. The push kinda came from the other direction, the journals
wanted to make sure they were able to dissiminate to their readership any new
scientific observations so they wanted to make sure they got a record of all
of them.

This meant a lot of the articles were basically "I brought a bunch of things into a room,
tried some experiments a few times, some weird things happened and then I
tried it again, and the wierd things happened again! In my excitement as I
continued observing the weirdness, I got ahead of myself and accidentally broke 
the stuff I was using to make the weird thing so I wasn't able to play with
it any more. Sincerely, some random dude. August 1st say 1721"

And that was often what science looked like.  Often there'd be followups a few
months later that were basically like

"omg you guys totally flipped out about my description of the weird things. I got a 
bunch of letters where you tried numerous variations and also saw the weird stuff going on.
Isn't this exciting? Anyway, here's my encore presentation where I talk about more weird stuff."

As I said there wasn't a lot of capital associated with science and Grey's
main profession was an artisan dyer of threads, not a high paying job.  Along with bumming around as
a scientist he managed to be awarded the what will eventually be the coveted Copley Medal for scientific
inquiry twice, the first two years it was awarded. This award is given at most once
a year and the recipient list includes names like Stephen Hawking, Albert
Einstein, Pavlov, Louis Pasteur, Darwin, Benjamin Franklin, and Stephen Grey.

As there wasn't a lot of ways to make money with science at the time, it was
mostly a curious hobby sponsored by wealthy benefactors. The Copley medal for
instance, came about when someone, a landowner Sir Godfrey Copley, set aside
100 pounds or $15,000 in modern money to fund the medal and gift a small
bounty to be spent on science to the recipient. 

During the time of the experiments we're going to discuss Grey relied on the
benevolence of two people in particular whose names are going to come up, John
Godfrey, and Granville Wheler. John Godfrey spent quite a bit on science and
took many experimenters under his wings, essentially as an informal
foundation.

He even for instance, paid for the burial of John Harris, who wrote Lexicon Technicum, the first
english encyclopedia with an emphasis on math and science. Write the first Math and
Science encyclopedia, have it be succesful among the very small group of
natural philosophers of the era and you'd still die so poor that someone else
is paying for your funeral.  So was the life of a scientist in London in the 1700s.

Grey, who lived at the London Charterhouse almshouse the last 15 years of his life, 
essentially a form of public housing for those too old to work and too poor to
rent, starts his letter apologizing for taking so long to write the letter:

"According to my promise I herein give an account of what farther I have
discovered relating to electrical attraction, which I should have done sooner,
but was willing to see what farther improvements I could make to those
Experiments"

Remember what I said about having a small fanclub? This is a letter to the
London science fanclub.

So Grey was at Godfrey's house in 1731 when he conducted experiments to show
that electricity could pass through two bodies and basically do the same thing
at the end of the second body that it could do at the beginning or without the
bodies there at all. 

Now we aren't talking the Isaac Newton style abstract body, no, Gray passed the
electricity through human bodies, children in fact.  This sounds insane, he
electrified people? 

Well yes, how else was he to show that the electricity passed through things and
wasn't say some invisible force like magnetism or did something even stranger?
If you apply some electricity at one end, have two people saying "ouch ouch" and 
then your little ball on a string sways towards a rod at the other, well then,
the electricty passes through.

It's a pretty brilliant experiment actually. 

But why did he use children? They don't weigh a lot.

He suspended them in the air using thin threads and did the experiment and
then had them stand on some rosin (an insulator) and do it again. One in the
air, one on the rosin, etc.

During his September 13 experiment Grey used this curious word when describing
the phenomena of electricity passing through children and then picking up
slips of paper:

"There was an attraction *communicated* from one end to the other"

This is of course projection from our modern eyeballs but it's worth noting
nonetheless.

So what kind of communication are we dealing with with electricity? 

Funny you ask that. The next day Wheler,
Godfrey and Grey were hanging out and they suspended a bunch of rods on
threads, electrifying them and seeing how they became attracted when
electrified and the electric effuvia, essentially meaning an unpleasant thing, 
moved through them as well. So wait, does electricity also travel through the air? Nobody
knew yet. Time for more experiments!

Grey called the children back, and on September 29 had some 
fishing rods with him. First he repeated the original experiment and found
that electricity passed through one rod, then an ouch, a second ouch, and the
other rod.  Not a huge surprise there.

Next he made the kids stand really close togther but not touch. He electrified
the rod but it stopped at the end of the first kid no matter how close they
got. Then when they touched it continued. 

So electricity travels. Apparently invisibly, quickly, and without much
effort. 

This caused quite a stir and some excitement. Grey was encouraged to do more
more more, tell us everything Mr. Grey.

Well ok then, so his next letter, the following month, was 27 pages long. It's
a fun read if you're into that kind of stuff and hint, I am into that kind of
stuff, but the part I'll focus on is when he went off to Godfrey's place,
remember, large land owner in the country.  He was trying to find out how far
electricity could travel so he was looking for balconies and rooftops to drop
a giant rod from, then have someone at the ground see if little sheets of
brass would do their thing or well let me just quote him:

"With the pole and tube I stood on the balcony, the assistant below in the
court, where he held the board with the leaf-brass on it; then the tube being
excited as usual, the electric virtue passed from the tube up the pole and
down the line to the ivory ball, which attracted the leaf brass ans as the
ball passed over it in its vibrations the leaf brass would follow it. But
these experiments are difficult to make in the open air, the least wind that
is stirring, carrying away the leaf brass"

He first went to a gallery that was 16 feet high, then from a parapet,
designed for war, about 29 feet high, then a clock tower at 34 feet ... and that was the
highest building in town.

He mentions wanting to try his experiments at St Pauls Cathedral in London not
doubting things would succeed.

Now let me stop you right there. Stephen. You know you aren't going to get
access to St Pauls cathedral and a 10 minute walk to your east was the
monument to the great fire of london, essentially a giant, publicly accessible
column 202 feet high that anyone could walk to the top of. 

Personally I don't think Stephen actually wanted to make a 200 foot rod and he was
like "ok, the clock tower is fine.  I'll just say I could do st pauls, nobody will take
me up on it. If I said I wanted to do the monument, I'm going to get some
knocks on my door the next day with royal society people saying "so stephen,
how about the monument? it's open today ... let's go!""

Also if he was worried about the wind pushing his rod from a first story
balcony, yeah, he didn't actually want to do it.

So after Grey ran out of tall buildings he tried to go further by laying his
rods horizontally. Unfortunately, the ways he supported them kept shorting out 
the connection because he had to keep the rod from breaking somehow.

But then Mr. Wheler, being a richer man suggested to maybe use fine silks to
hang the rod ... ladies and gentleman we are almost at the invention of the electric wire.

If you thought it would take less time then this, well that's not the kind of
party you're at.

