Today I'm proud to introduce The Stolen Stars; a dramatization of the
1712 Flamsteed/Newton controversy. Although the dynamics and interactions are real, 8 years has been compressed to 10 minutes so some liberties have been taken

oh hi John, so nice to see you! I just picked up a copy of your new book. It's fantastic. Congratulations

What new book?

Your star catalog! I knew you'd get around to publishing it. I have my copy
right here.

Can I see it?

Only if you sign it. OF course.

"Historia Coelestis Britannica, written by John Flamsteed and edited by, Dr.
Edmond Haley?! I never permitted this. Let me see this ... this is my star
catalo... what here? there's been edits! This is wrong. What on earth?"

My word good man, you're saying you had nothing to do with this?

It's my unfinished work, yes, but it was somehow taken and published behind my
... it even has my charts that I secured away. Those were nowhere near ready.
They were riddled with errors. And apparently Dr. Haley has put more in."

Who do you think was behind this?

Who else? Our esteemed colleague, Sir Isaac Newton.

What do you say we pay him a visit and straighten this out.

Yes, I'm afraid we'll have to. So much bad science could happen with
inaccurate observations, we have a responsibility here.


...

Newton: One moment, I'm coming

Why Dr. Flamsteed, how lovely of you to come by. What do you honor me with
your presence for?

Do you know anything about this?

Why yes, it appears to be a book.

Do you know who wrote it?

Let me ...why good job old boy, you finally did it. Congratulations on
publishing your work.

I did not. You did.

You only care about your lunar observations. You care not for the position of
the stars. You know I would have permitted you to view my records at your
leisure.


Do you think anyone is going to remember John Flamsteed, John Hooke, or
Stephen Grey?

All those men dedicated decades to science while you sir have only dedicated
those decades to your own pursuits. 

As with everything there are the foreman and the foundry workers. You, my dear
flamsteed are but a mere brick layer believing himself to be an architect.


How many of thes books did you make?

Oh but a handful.

How many?

Just 400.

400?! You have poisoned the wells for observation from which every scientist
must drink. The only thing worse than not knowing is believing the false to be
true.

What are you to do about it?

I will retrieve every copy and burn it. It will be published when I have
verified the contents.

You're 66 years old Flamsted, you will be finished first.

The Worcester Cathedral took over 400 years. We spend 4 centuries
building shrines to the Gods yet you believe you can understand them in a
single lifetime.

Dr. Flamsteed, it is always a pleasure but I must get going. Also I found an
inconsistency in the accounting history of the royal society. I'll sadly have
to be suspending your membership. Thank you for stopping by and
congratulations on the new book.

Will I at least get paid for the sale?

Newton: I'm sorry, after paying myself and Dr. Haley, there's nothing left
over. Good day.

Well it was Isaac, what were you expecting?

He's right though.

What do you mean?

We really are merely the bricklayers. The most important jobs are those with the least power.

Would you like my copy of the book? I surely can not keep it in good faith.

No no. You may keep it. Inform me of any errors if you find them. I'll be
publishing my version eventually. Here let me sign it for you. After all, these are my stars.
