Lewie Oh dee ay Edinburah

Hello and welcome to computing history episode 1.1, the dream of 
electric communications part 1.

Electric communication, it's how we directed the Voyager 1 space 
craft, far past the orbit of Neptune to snap a final photo of the earth 
so we could see our planet as a pale blue dot suspended in a sunbeam.

It's also how components communicate that are so incredibly tiny that 
if they had legs, it would take them around 3 hours to walk across a 
single grain of sand.

Even more astounding is these two things and everything in between 
speak nearly the same electric language.

So where did this all start?

It actually didn't start with electricity. The word telegraph, as 
far as a dictionary goes, doesn't imply electricity at all. It simply 
means communication at a distance.

Humans have had ways of communicating at a distance in time and space 
 using coded symbols for thousands of years. 

Alphabets, smoke signals, drums, mirrors reflecting the sunlight, 
many methods were developed.

During the Han dynasty in China 2000 years ago, for instance, people 
communicated along the signal towers of the great wall of china using 
things such as lights, flags, and fires. Messages would be relayed 
across the wall and traveled about 30 miles per hour, about as fast 
as a galloping horse.

Each of these examples are of different mediums. For instance, with 
an alphabet, a surface is marked with symbols and then you just need 
to worry about the caring for and transporting of the marked surface.

We're going to start our story with the fantasy of communicating 
using the medium of electricity.

In the same way we talk about currently unachievable technology, such 
as visiting other galaxies, to the dreamers of the 18th century, 
electric communication was a hope and a vision capturing the 
imaginations of the telegraph pioneers.

These machines of science fiction were described in detail often with 
excited fanciful flourishes over about 70 years before the first 
working electric telegraph was achieved and that one only extended to 
the inventor's garden.

This time we'll be looking at the first of a series of futurist 
luminaries who dreamed of a telegraphic world connecting people in a 
way that made their distance irrelevant empowering them to have, even 
casual conversations spanning over vast oceans.

If you were alive in 1753 living in Edinburgh you may have been a 
reader of general Scots Magazine. In their February issue of that 
year among the contents you would see the speeches in debate upon a 
subsidy to the King of Poland, whether a reformed rake, a man of 
sense or a man of good nature ought to be a preferred husband and an 
expeditious method of conveying intelligence by means of electricity.

Although the article about the reformed rakes is quite good, we'll 
surprisingly be focusing on the electricity one.

It was written by, well, nobody quite knows. The letter is signed 
with the initials C.M. It starts with a curious observation:

"It is well known to all who are conversant in electrical experiments 
that electric power may be propagated along a smile wire, from one 
place to another without being sensibly abated by the length of its 
progress.

Now this is not going to sound like the single wire with the dots and 
dashes that you've all heard about, so pay attention

Let, then, a set of wires, equal in number to the letters of the 
alphabet, be extended horizontally between two given places, parallel 
to one another, and each of them about an inch distant from that next 
to it. At every twenty yards' end, let them be fixed in glass, or 
jeweller's cement, to some firm body, both to prevent them from 
touching the earth, or any other non-electric, and from breaking by 
their own gravity. Let the electric gun-barrel be placed at right 
angles with the extremities of the wires, and about an inch below 
them. Also let the wires be fixed in a solid piece of glass, at six 
inches from the end; and let that part of them which reaches from the 
glass to the machine have sufficient spring and stiffness to recover 
its situation after having been brought in contact with the barrel. 
Close by the supporting glass, let a ball be suspended from every 
wire ; and about a sixth or an eighth of an inch below the balls, 
place the letters of the alphabet, marked on bits of paper, or any 
other substance that may be light enough to rise to the electrified 
ball ; and at the same time let it be so contrived, that each of them 
may re- assume its proper place when dropt.* 

"All things constructed as above, and the minute previously fixed, I 
begin the conversation with my distant friend in this manner. Having 
set the electrical machine a-going as in ordinary experiments, 
suppose I am to pronounce the word Sir ; with a piece of glass, or 
any other electric per se, I strike the wire S, so as to bring it in 
contact wtth the barrel, then i, then r, all in the same way ; and my 
correspondent, almost in the same instant, observes these several 
characters rise in order to the electrified balls at his end of the 
wires. Thus I spell away as long as I think fit ; and my 
correspondent, for the sake of memory, writes the characters as they 
rise, and may join and read them afterwards as often as he inclines. 
Upon a signal given, or from choice, I stop the machine ; and, taking 
up the pen in my turn, I write down whatever my friend at the other 
end strikes out. 

Are you still with me? Did you follow all that? The suggestion was to 
have small pieces of paper with letters written on them jumping up, 
via static electricity to tiny electrified balls as the sender 
manually electrifies the wires, one for each letter, and then waits a 
bit to allow the slips of paper to flutter back down one by one as 
the remote observer diligently records what letters hit their balls 
in what order. 

Ah, the familiar electric telegraph. Why, what were you expecting? 
A single wire you say? Don't be silly! How would that even work?! Why 
clearly there needs to be a separate individual wire for every letter 
of the alphabet. If your language has a different number of letters 
than you'll simply need a different number of wires.

You might say, "Well didn't it occur to anyone to just hook up a 
speaker and use some kind of coded system instead?" Huh? What's an 
electric speaker? they'd say. This is 1753. That's over 100 years 
away.

The giants whose shoulders you wish to stand upon have yet to be 
born. We continue:

"If anybody should think this way tiresome, let him, instead of the 
balls, suspend a range of bells from the roof, equal in number to the 
letters of the alphabet ; gradually decreasing in size from the bell 
A to Z ; and from the horizontal wires, let there be another set 
reaching to the several bells ; one, viz., from the horizontal wire A 
to the bell A, another from the horizontal wire B to the bell B, &c. 
Then let him who begins the discourse bring the wires in contact with 
the barrel, as before ; and the electrical spark, breaking on bells 
of different size, will inform his correspondent by the sound what 
wires have been touched. And thus, by some practice, they may come to 
understand the language of the chimes in whole words, without being 
put to the trouble of noting down every letter."

We only have this one letter. There is no machine, any evidence of 
one constructed, or even any knowledge as to who the author was. 
People have been searching for who CM was since the letter was 
published 270 years ago. Maybe it was a woman scientist hiding in the 
shadows or prehaps someone who deeply believed in the possibility of 
the telegraph but had nothing to show but failed implementations and 
used the veil of anonymity to hide their shame.  

Regardless here was the first glimpse we had of the electric 
communication.

But wait, there's 10 more to go before 1800, and we're not even going 
to reach them all today. Almost none of them had any evidence of ever 
having been built, yet alone actually working. Like a quack in a 
garage working on a time machine, someone claiming to be getting 
close to a working electric telegraph could have been readily 
dismissed and regarded as an ignorant fool throughout the remainder 
of the 1700s.

So we'll follow this futile quackery of communicating via electricity 
down to southern Europe at the College of Rome where a lecturer on 
natural philosophy (let's call it science), Joseph Bozolus suggested 
such a device based on spark in 1767.  He described it in Latin, via 
poetry in a text called the Electicorum.

Being poetry he doesn't go into too much detail but it's basically 
bury two insulated wires, keep them close together, charge the wire 
at one end to create a spark at the other. The encoding of your 
entire language via electric sparks is left as an exercise to the 
reader.

This is far closer then paper strips clinging to electrostatic balls 
but it also doesn't seem to have ever been built.

Now if an alphabet of bells and a latin poem wasn't enough color in 
1773 a Genevan Physician named Louis Odier was trying to pick up a 
lady and thought he could do it by talking about his telegraph idea.  
He wrote to her:

" I shall amuse you, perhaps, in telling you that I have in my head 
certain experiments by which to enter into conversation with the 
emperor of Mogol, or of China, the English, the French, or any other 
people of Europe, in a way that, without incon- veniencing yourself, 
you may intercommunicate all that you wish, at a distance of four or 
five thousand leagues in less than half an hour ! Will that suffice 
you for glory . There is nothing more real. What- ever be the course 
of those experiments, they must necessarily lead to some grand 
discovery ; but I have not the courage to undertake them this winter.'

Figures. Nice try Louis. He also doesn't seem to have built anything. 
 Dreams pave the road to reality however long that route may be.

Round 4 brings us to Alessandro Volta. Now you should notice by this 
dude's name "Volta" that he's probably where the unit of Volts came 
from and is therefore likely to be pretty important when it comes to 
electricity. His telegraph related experiments weren't disclosed 
until research into his archives after death done by someone named, 
and remember this name, Francis Ronalds, who at the age of 85 wrote 
into the first edition of the first journal of the society of 
telegraph engineers about Volta having described a nearly working 
telegraph in 1777. 

It was however, mostly hype. The description did contain some 
genuinely good future thought. An excerpt of the translated letter is 
as follows:

"The more I reflect, the more I see the beautiful experiments that 
can be made by means of the spark in exploding the electric pistol at 
any distance. An iron wire, stretched along the fields, or roads, for 
I know not how many miles, could . conduct the spark. As, however, in 
long distances moist earth and water- courses would be encountered, 
which would draw off the electric fire, the wire may be supported on 
posts placed at regular intervals"

Volta, however, just like everyone else didn't actually build his 
idea, in this case, an infrastructure of posts. There's actually not 
much to see here. We are often predisposed to attribute great insight 
to great minds even in cases where there was none to be had.

Speaking of great insight, let's look at our 5th telegraph idea, 
coming from the May 30th 1782 Journal of Paris. This one brings forth 
a number of groundbreaking ideas that become essential in the world 
of electronic computers.

Along with being yet another dream in a line of unbuilt machines, it 
was the first to describe a form of electronic encoding in details, 
that is to say a system of code designed to work specifically under 
the confinements of electricity.  As everyone can attest to, 
accomodating for the realities of a machine is one of the first steps 
in learning how to use a computer.

In this proposal we even get a suggestion of binary, byte and a 
primitive form of data compression using what is called a lookup or 
reference table. Of course these words hadn't been appropriated yet 
and so we are applying this analysis with a contemporary lens, but 
let's go on.

The anonymous author starts by describing a hybrid system between the 
Scottish CM and a spark system. They propose a pair of wires for 
every letter of the alphabet placed close against a tin and then 
using the spark between the wire and the tin for each letter. But the 
proposed method of observation is to be achieved by creating little 
knobs on a panel extending from the tin. Each knob will illuminate 
upon spark. 

Seen those old computers with all the blinking lights on some panel? 
Yes, that's what this author is describing using 1780s technology.

They go on with a CM like system wherein you have a wire for every 
letter. Correctly identifying having 48 wires (2 for each letter) 
would be somewhat impractical they propose as follows:

"These means could be simplified by having only 5 pairs of wires and 
attaching a character or letter to each of their combination as in, 
firing multiple wires as once, which would make 31 characters (or 2^5 
- 1); six pairs would yield 63 (or 2^6 - 1) and thus one could arrive 
at a sort of shorthand or fast writing with one combination sufficing 
for an entire word or phrase. There would be some difficulty however 
in discharging at exactly the same instant several pairs. One might 
also use successive combinations of these pairs in which 5 pairs 
would give 125 signals and 6 216 which would be very fast"

Woah hold on here ... what did we just read? 

First there's a suggestion of a byte, in this case having 5 or 6 
bits. The author correctly identifies the number of combinations and 
that timing is absolutely essential in making it work and also quite 
hard. Then they describe what is called serial communication in the 
computing world essentially stagnating the symbols into a stream.  
They can't re-use the previously illuminated knobs so there's an 
encoding limitation meaning that their "word size" of "2 bytes" of 
either 5 or 6 bits didn't have the full set of combinations.

These are all absolutely essential ideas in computing. If this was 
it, we could stop here, take our ball and go home. But there's even 
more.  

In computing we separate what we call control and data. That is to 
say we need a way to say something will begin, the control an then we 
begin that something, the data. Then we need a way to say something 
is ending. Ths separation is crucial in any protocol design so our 
18th century proto-computer scientist of course includes this detail 
as well

"It would be necessary to give each correspondent a means of 
notifying that he wished to communicate, to prevent constant watching 
and cross signalling. For this an electric bell would suffice, and by 
agree- ing beforehand that one stroke shall mean ' I will call you up 
in 15 minutes,' two strokes ' I am all attention,' etc., all 
confusion would be avoided."

And then, like someone who just wandered in a room and casually 
defeated everyone while yawning and checking their watch, our author 
concludes:

"As this letter is only intended for those who amuse themselves with 
physics, they can easily supply for themselves all the details that I 
have omitted."

Maybe they were anonymous because they were a time traveler.

Our dreamer #5 wasn't seen as groundbreaking at the time however as 
the editor notied:

His project of an easy communication between two very distant places 
appears to be only the ream of some pleasant trifler. It is, however, 
not new, and would only imperfectly accomplish its object;

Oh pish posh.

Now if you thought our anonymous author sounded like the fantasies of 
a computer programmer, telegraph fever dream #6 will come from 
someone who acted like one.

Georges Louis Le Sage was born in Geneva in 1724 to strict academic 
parents and after hopping around many scientific disciplines he tried 
his way as a doctor but was forbidden from practicing in Geneva after 
acquiring his medical degree in Paris for the sole reason that his 
father was not a Genevan. These were stranger times.

Giving up on medicine Goerge sought a study of mathematics, against 
his fathers will, but wasn't able to get a university position. Ah 
the college dropout syndrome.

Le Sage was an interesting guy. He described his manner of working in 
the following ways:

I have been born with four dispositions well adapted for making 
progress in science, but with two great defects in the faculties 
necessary for that purpose. 1. An ardent desire to know the truth; 2. 
Great activity of mind; 3. An uncommon soundness of understanding; 4. 
A strong desire for precision and distinctness of ideas; 5. An 
excessive weakness of memory; 6. A great incapacity of continued 
attention.

He also suffered from insomnia and often slept throughout the day. If 
you ever wondered what computer programmer types did before 
computers, well here's your chance to find out.

He describes essentially a clone of the CM system but uses separate 
tubing for each wire, and uses gold leaf instead of slips of paper. 

Which is not that remarkable until you find out what he does next. Of 
course like the others Le Sage doesn't actually have the resources to 
build the thing but this time, that doesn't stop him. 

Instead he tries his hand at raising a round of venture capital - of 
course like our other phrases, this had yet to be named that. Where 
does he go for such wealth in the 1780s? Well to the King of Prussia 
of course:

 Sire, — My little fortune is not only sufficient for all my wants, 
but even for all my tastes — except one, viz., that of contributing 
to the wants and tastes of others ; and this desire all the monarchs 
of the world, united, could not enable me to fully satisfy. It is 
not, then, to a patron who can give much, that I take the liberty of 
dedicating the following discovery, but to a patron who can do much 
with it, and who can judge for himself of its utility without having 
to refer it to his advisers.

And then he attached diagrams and descriptions, like a enlightenment 
era pitch deck and waited for a response. 

There's no evidence on the Prussian side so like most startup 
aspirations, his angel investor, in his case, the king of prussia, 
failed to materialize.

And that's how we're going to end today's episode. We started in 1753 
in Scotland and are now 30 years later without a single working 
system.  Nothing even claims to have been built yet.

That will all change in 1787 however, where someone claims to have 
actually seen a telegraph working between two rooms. Did this one 
actually exist? You can decide for yourself as we discuss Lemond's 
Telegraph.

1753 Scots Magazine article 1767 Bozolus's Telegraph (latin) 1773 
Odier's Telegraph 1777 Volta's Telegraph 1782 Le Sage's Journal de 
Paris 1787 Lomong's single wire telegraph 1790 Chappe's telegraph 
1790 Reveroni-Saint Telegraph 1794 Reusser's telegraph 1795 Bockman 
1796 Salva

1816 Francis Ronalds first working telegraph Our story begins Where 
this all started is  

He was an avid tinkerer and came up with a machine that could 
communicate by electricity over wire. We'd call it a telegraph.

 Louis Odier Geneva, 1773 If George 

 So here we are, it's 1816 and we have a telegraph based on a compass 
where the dial will spin around to a letter instead of to the north. 
It's not at all that different than what was first described in the 
anonymous letter  60 years prior although we unfortunately do not get 
the lovely bells to go along with it.

