Hello and welcome to computing history episode 1.3, the journey to the
electric wire.

Day sa goo lee ae

As discussed in the last episode I am already caving into listener requests
and so let's step into our wayback machine, turning the clock back about 50
years to the late 1720s. This is before our CM article in Scots magazine in
1752 where there were floating alphabetic rips of paper statically clinging to
balls. 

We're going to start with electric communication. Well at least someone who
talked about electricity itself as a form of communication.  The early
scientist we're going to be talking about is Stephen Gray. Sorry, the supposedly working telegraph 
promise given at the end of 1.1 will have to wait for a future episode.

When I call Stephen Grey an early scientist, I do mean it. The word scientist was first used in
1834 by the english polymath William Hewl. Our modern cognitive perimeters we
place around phrases such as math and science are pretty contemporary. In the
1700s people considered many more things, such as commerce and music to fall
under the umbrella labeled science. That's because science as an institution
and a discipline was still forming at the time. Stephen
Gray however, really sounds like someone who would fit strongly inside even our
more restricted modern notions of science


In A History of Science, published in 1904, Henry Williams referred to him as an irascible old
pensioner. Over on Wikipedia you'll read that he was a relatively unknown 
shadow of his friend John Theophilus Desaguliers who stole the limelight 
over factional differences between Flamsteed and Newton - Newton, did you know
he was an actual irascible scoundrel? A great scientist but also kind of an
bellicose intellectual pirate. We'll be going over his colorful spats in the
first supplemental, hopefully next week. Let me give you a preview: Newton died a childless bachelor. Was
that because he was secretly what we classify today as asexual or homosexual? 
Or was it because he was just that insufferable to be around? T
We'll be going more into the great Flamsteed/Newton Newton/Liebniz
Sloane/Newton drama next week where we'll get into soap opera details on all
these character but I'm saving that fun for next week.

Anyway back to Grey. If you read Desaguliers "A Dissertation Concerning Electricity", from 
1742, a list of 24 different experiments to observe the phenomena of electricity, the
author speaks quite glowingly of Stephen Gray who by then had been dead for 6
years. Gray even probably lived with Desagulier for about 4 years in the 1710s. In his 
later letters in the 1720s he speaks of corresponding with Desagulier regularly.  
To get an insight into Grey, all you need to do is read his publications. He's
energetic and excitable about experimentation and sees science as a form
of play. One gets the feeling that he doesn't seems to be interested in anything other than that pursuit.

I like to think of Gray as an excited science nerd without social graces. The
impertinant Doc Brown personality from Back to the Future in 18th century
England

Gray died a childless bachelor at the age of 70 spending at least 30 years 
publishing early science works spanning from astronomy, optics, and most 
importantly electricity.  Well there was a large 25 year gap where his papers
got rejected but that just happens to correspond with the time that Newton was the head of
the royal society.  In fact after Newton became president, Gray was basically
shut out and then when Newton died, Grey's submissions magically became accepted once
more for publication and most of his exciting electrical work came after he
was 60 years old.

Grey was never a rich man and had a life of an unknown profession that
consisted of hard labor. At the age of 40 in a letter he wrote he spoke of
suffering from Dolor Ischiadis, more or less what sounds like a hernia in 
today's language, rendering him unable to make observations of Jupiters moons. 

Although I said his profession was unknown I think there's a strong case he
worked in textiles and was probably a thread dyer like his father. In his
experiments he seems to have a fairly significant level of knowledge of
different kinds of threads and string materials.  He doesn't seem to have had
any formal education although he did spend some time in cambridge.

After Gray was elected to the royal society, the place to go for science in the day, he had to have
someone else cover his dues - well as it turned out actually a lot of people
didn't pay and the society was pretty financially insolvent for the first half
of the 1700s, but what are you expecting from a nerd club?

I like to think for Grey as one of those really smart people you may know who has
a dusty PHD he got solely based on curiosity tucked away in a box he doesn't
ever mention, who drives around in a beat up old car and is always working on
interesting projects, not really seeming to care much about money or status. 
A person who keeps the company of respected people and is well-respected by 
them, but to everyone else, is just some scraggly wanderer completely 
captured by his hobbies.  It actually sounds pretty fun.

Robert Chipman, a scholar of science history wrote in 1958 that Grey was
"strikingly free of literary obscurity, personal belligerency, profitless
speculation, or exploitation for entertainment. The problems for which he
sought solutions, if not always of the highest importance, were always genuine
and never trivial or foolish. His suggestions, experiments, and conclusions
were almost invariably highly relevant." Here here, if we could all be spoken
of with such high accolades.

Gray's impoverishment may have actually worked in his favor because being on a
small budget, his science experiments ended up often being wickedly clever, using
pretty common things and thus being easily repeatable. He may have helped 
inadvertently popularize science for the non-wealthy so a person of average means 
reading could go "hey wait a minute, I have those things in this room. I could try that out right now".
For example His first publications were about microscopes made with water-droplets in
1697. 

Anyway, we'll be focusing on two letters he wrote in January and February
of 1731 that were published in Philisophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, a scientific journal that started in 1665.  Back then there was a
variety of ways of getting published. In Stephens case, he just wrote
a letter, in prose, at the time to Cromwell Mortimer, the secretary of the journal, in freeform
discribing his experiments.

Mortimer would read over letters like this and if he thought "eh, cool -
doesn't look like nonsense" then it'd be typeset and published in the next
issue... and that's all it took, well at least after Newton died. Gray's first
electrical article in 1708 was rejected by the secretary at the time, Sloane.
Science historians say that Newton's iron fist control on who was and was
not heard from in the royal society's publications delayed the electrical revolution by 25 years.

In the 1700s, there wasn't a lot of social capital tied to being published in a
science journal. Outside of the small academic elite and a few scattered
societies nobody had any idea who even Isaac Newton was. When he was president of
the Royal Society between 1703 and 1727 - there were only about 300 elected
members.

The publication push often came from the other direction, the journals
wanted to make sure they were able to dissiminate to their readership any new
scientific observations, well the ones from people they liked, so they wanted 
to make sure they got a record of all of them. 

This meant a lot of the articles were basically "I brought a bunch of things into a room,
tried some experiments a few times, some weird things happened and then I
tried it again, and the wierd things happened again! In my excitement as I
continued observing the weirdness, I got ahead of myself and accidentally broke 
the stuff I was using to make the weird thing so I wasn't able to play with
it any more. Sincerely, some random dude. August 1st say 1721"

And that was often what science looked like.  Often there'd be a followup a
month or two later that was basically like

"omg you guys totally flipped out about my description of the weird things. I got a 
bunch of letters where you tried numerous variations and also saw the weird stuff going on.
Isn't this exciting? Anyway, here's my encore presentation where I talk about more weird stuff."

As I said there wasn't a lot of capital associated with science and Gray's
main profession was probably an artisan dyer of threads in Canterbury which was not a high paying job.  Along with bumming around as
a scientist he managed to be awarded the what will eventually be the coveted Copley Medal for scientific
inquiry twice, the first two years it was awarded. This award is given at most once
a year and the recipient list includes names like Stephen Hawking, Albert
Einstein, Pavlov, Louis Pasteur, Charles Darwin, Benjamin Franklin, and Stephen Gray.

As there wasn't a lot of ways to make money with science at the time, it was
mostly a curious hobby sponsored by wealthy benefactors. The Copley medal for
instance, came about when someone, a landowner Sir Godfrey Copley, set aside
100 pounds or $15,000 in modern money to fund the medal and gift a small
bounty to be spent on science to the recipient. 

During the time of the experiments we're going to discuss Gray relied on the
benevolence of two people in particular whose names are going to come up, John
Godfrey, and Granville Wheler. John Godfrey spent quite a bit on science and
took many experimenters under his wings, essentially as an informal
foundation.

He even for instance, paid for the burial of John Harris, a clergyman who wrote Lexicon Technicum, the first
english encyclopedia with an emphasis on math and science. There's those words
again. The full name of the text is Lexicon Technicum, or, An Universal
English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Explaining not only the Terms of Art,
but the Arts Themselves. Some of the sciences it covers include law, commerce,
music, heraldry, and humanities. As I said, what science is and is not has
changed. Some things that were not science and not in there are theology, 
antiquity, history, and poetry. 

Write the first Math and
Science encyclopedia, have it be succesful among the very small group of
natural philosophers of the era and you'd still die so poor that someone else
is paying for your funeral.  So was the life of a science writer in England in the 1700s.

Stephen Gray, who lived at the London Charterhouse almshouse the last 15 years
of his life, essentially a form of public housing for those too old to work and too poor to
rent (and it took him years to get in), starts his letter apologizing for taking so long to write it:

"According to my promise I herein give an account of what farther I have
discovered relating to electrical attraction, which I should have done sooner,
but was willing to see what farther improvements I could make to those
Experiments"

Remember what I said about having a small fanclub? This is a letter to his
England science fanclub.

In this letter, Gray talks about being at Godfrey's house in 1731 where
he conducted experiments to show
that electricity could pass through a body and basically do the same thing
at the end of the body that it could do at the beginning.

Now we aren't talking the jerk Newton's abstract body, no, Gray passed the
electricity through human bodies, children in fact.  This sounds insane, he
electrified people? 

Well yes and no. We're talking a very small amount of electricity here. For
instance, as one of the boys stood on rosin, essentially an insulator, his
hands were extended a few inches above leaf brass. Then as Grey used a glass tube
to rub the boy's ankle, there was a reaction near the boy's hands with
the leaf brass. So yes, he was electricuting children, but in a Mr. Wizard
kind of way.

He used children in this set of experiments because along with doing a number
of experiments where they stood on rosin, he could then suspend the children in the
air by very thin threads and repeat the same experiment, in order to  
understand if there was a difference in how electricity operated between being
suspended and being grounded.

And also although being a very small amount of electricity it could still be
sensed. At the time they used the word effluvia, essentially an unpleasant
feeling to talk about electricity.

Additionally a human can do things like grab things. This makes running
multiple experiments pretty fast without having to set up complicated
contraptions

Since Grey had both a base of rosin to stand on and a contraption with
thin thread to hang someone from, he did a number of experiments with two children,
one hanging and one standing. 

For instance, the standing child would hold his hand out above the brass leaf as before, but
his other hand would be clasped to the boy suspended by the threads as grey
would take his glass and rub the ankle of the suspended boy to see if the
electric Virtue would "communicate" through the boys.  This of course worked.

This being established he could then see fairly quickly what things
electricity passed through. The boys could hold either end of some twine, or a
ruler, or some brass, or whatever he wished. Grey would use his glass tube to
rub the ankle of the suspended one and then see if the brass leaves rose at
the other end of the chain. If they did, then the electric virtue passed
through the material.

It's all pretty efficient. Now if you noticed I used the word "communicate"
here which is again, the actual topic of all of this. We're trying to
establish that electric communication is possible and here we've established
that the electricity itself appears to communicate.


The next day Wheler, Godfrey and Gray were hanging out and they suspended a 24
foot rod by silk and had two right angle wands above it but not touching it.
When Gray rubbed the rod he found that a piece of thread was attracted to the wands,
even though the wand had never touched the rod. It was only approximately near
it. This made it look like the electric virtue was also wireless,
communicating through the air between a wand and the rod. Is this possible? Nobody
knew yet. Time for more experiments!

---
The day after, Gray called the children back, and on September 29 had some 
fishing rods with him. He had both boys stand on the rosin and hold a twine
between each other. He rubbed the twine with the glass and both boys were able
to attract and repel the brass leaves ... this is basically calibration. Now
having established that, he had the kids stand really close togther but not to
let their coats or any part of thie clothing touch, about an inch away. This is similar to the rod and the
wand but with humans. He then tried to repeat the experiment but the electric
virtue didn't jump through the air from one boy to the other. 

He asked the boys to toch each others hands and the electric virtu immediately traversed. 

Stephen Grey continues on for another couple pages with other experiments that
are outside the pure scope of our wire study but this article apparently
caused quite a bit of stir and excitement because he followed it up with
another article the following month.

Grey's february article detailing more experiments was 27 pages long. It's
a fun read if you're into that kind of stuff and hint, I am into that kind of
stuff, the part I'll focus on is when he went off to Godfrey's and then
Wheler's place to find out how far electricity could travel. 

He started in large rooms, making longer and longer poles but by the time he got to 32
feet it became difficult because the pole started bending. Also, when he was
rubbing it with the glass, it would inadvertantly whip the end which if you recall has to be fairly close to extremely light flakes of brass.

So it's time for another contraption.

Imagine a giant fishing pole 18 feet long with the fishing line tied at the end, 34 feet long,
and then at the very bottom of the fishing line is a ball of cork or an ivory
ball. Now imagine you're fishing from a balcony and there's an
assistant in the courtyard holding essentially a board of wood with some of
the brass leaves on it so when Grey manages to drop the ball the assistant
walks over and makes sure the leaves are close enough to the ball to get
attracted to it if the electricity is transferred. This is his next
contraption.

Now Grey from the balcony needs to rub the pole with the glass tube and see if the electric
virtue is communicated to the end of the twine. At the same time the assistant
has to wander around the courtyard and make sure he can keep up with the
vibrating cork that is moving to and fro.  But it gets even wackier as Grey
says:

"But these experiments are difficult to make in the open air, the least wind that
is stirring, carrying away the leaf brass"

Oh right, wind.

Since this balcony was the highest thing he had access to he tried to lengthen
things by making things strictly horizontal. However, he tried fixing his
pole to beams via loops and nails. This of course isn't going to work. 

So he gave up the horizontal method for now but thought that if he
could try his fishing method at St Pauls Cathedral in London he'd surely be successful

Now let me stop you right there. Stephen. You know you aren't going to get
access to St Pauls cathedral and a 10 minute walk to your east was the
monument to the great fire of london, essentially a giant, publicly accessible
column 202 feet high that anyone could walk to the top of. 

Personally I don't think Stephen actually wanted to make a giant rod to hang
over a 200 foot building so he was
like "ok, if I just say I could do at the copola st pauls, nobody will take
me up on it. If I said I wanted to do the monument, I'm going to get some
knocks on my door the next day with royal society people saying "so stephen,
how about the monument? it's open today ... let's go!""

If you've ever been to this tower imagine someone with a giant fishing rod and
a twine extending down 200 feet to the ground with some ball of cork on the
end as an assistant runs around the courtyard. It's kind of a pity this didn't
happen. I mean it could ... we could probably get together and do this, rent
some renaissance clothes... Who do we need to talk to? Maybe the royal society
would be down, "Yo, this half sentence buried in this article you published
289 years ago, you guys still down to do this? Let's go!"

fev ur shim

Anyway, back to Grey. In late June 1729 he went to Weler's place which is really in
the middle of nowhere, about 7 miles southwest of feversham, which is again, 9
miles outside of canterbury.  Even today, really small town.

He went to a gallery that was 16 feet high, then from a parapet,
designed for war, about 29 feet high, then a clock tower at 34 feet ... and that was the
highest building in town.

Wheler then suggested "hey lets do this horizontally" but Stephen was like
"yo, I tried that at Godfreys in may, really didn't work". But then Wheler was
like "wait, remember those poles and wand we suspended by silk?" and Grey was
like "oh yeah those worked".

So Wheler got his servants to work on some very thin silks to hold the
packthread so the signal will traverse from one end to the other ... that
means, ladies and gentleman we are almost at the invention of the electric wire.

If you thought it would take less time then this, well that's not the kind of
party you're at.

What Wheler and Gray did next was form essentially a switchback network using
packthread and silkthread ... remember, Gray was a professional thread dyer
when he was younger, his knowledge of wire like things such as threads and
strings was actually quite good.  In a way he is the ideal candidate for
inventing wire, although he actually doesn't - he's just a retired man with a 
lot of interest in electricity and a solid foundation of and access to pieces of long thin material. 

There's a nice diagram by the mathematician and cartographer Johann Doppelmayr
in a 1744 publication whose title is literally 99 words long and has yet to be
digitized or translated from German. However, the IEEE reproduced one of the diagrams
on page 467 of their March 2020 Proceedings of the IEEE. You can get that one
online for free and there's a link posted at the podcast's website at comphistpod.com, did I tell you
there's a comphistpod.com? Anyway, yes, that's a thing now.

Back to our story. We're going to go over this mentioning the days so you can
get an idea as to how labor intensive this entire process must have been.

So it's July 2nd 1729, a very wet and cool july if historical records are
correct, they start at about 10 am in a room where they could make about 40 feet of packthread before having to cross back. 

so they go to the end of the room, have a piece of silk, think of it as a
horizontal bar, that they thread the twine around so they can go back the way
they came. It's not hard, they just looped it around, went to the end of the
room and then put the ivory ball and the brass sheets down.  When they did the
glass tube rubbing experiment at one end, it attracted the sheets at the
other almost instantly.  Success! Splendid!

So they wondered, how long could they make this? They tried another switchback so they're at
about 120 feet now (40 + 40 + 40 is ... oh yes there we are) and it worked.

And that's the end of the day. That took all day.

So now we're at July 3rd and they went crazy ... essentially criss crossing back
and forth down the entire room, ending up at about 293 feet ( about 7 times ) and it
worked, like almost as well as before.

And they were like "oh hey let's do it again, an 8th time" and they set it up.
Everything looke fine but  then as they were rubbing
the twine with the glass tube it was too much and a chain reaction snapped the
silk lines one by one, completely collapsing all the work they had done. 

And so that sucked. But wait! grey brought brass wire with him and they could
just use that instead. So they
replaced the silk support by inadvertently grounding the whole experiment and
putting in solid brass. But then of course it didn't work. Drats! But they
figured it out and were like "dude, the silk worked fine. The brass is the
thing messing us all up here. That makes everything fail."

So they went back to the silk "bars" and realized if they vertically stacked
them, you'd have one piece of silk supporting the bottom of your loop, and a
separate supporting the top, so it's less stress and operates as a way of
reinforcement. That worked! They got to 666 feet with this stitching method.

About 2 weeks later on July 11, they tried to do the experiment outside. They
put posts in the ground, suspending the silk from them, wrapped the packthread
around, going through gardens and fields, and got it all set up by about 7pm.
They got about 45 minutes of playing in until the england dew made things wet
and ruined everything.

So here we are, about 1729, with the concept of "communcation" going down a
"line", in this case being a thread, in order to repeat an experiment at a
distance.  The CM extension to this, of simply labeling the sheets of paper
with different letters and having 26 of them or so, sounds like a pretty
obvious next step.  But we aren't going to get there yet. 

I promised I'd slow down and well here we are. We aren't even at sparks yet.
So next time we'll be looking at more wire technology and work on up to our
Scots magazine publication. Then we'll skip over the stuff in 1.1 and go right
into communicating with pith balls. It'll be glorious.

Also let's talk about the show itself. These episodes take a lot of effort,
finding all the sources, hundreds of pages of reading, it's a bit of time.
Also I'm terrible at recording this.
Once a week appears too ambitious so for now, the longer, pure history timeline
episodes will be every other week. In between will be mini-episodes that are
a bit less academically rigorous. For instance, I'm planning on a radio play for next week
involving Newton and Flamsteed. The week after that we'll be picking up the
timeline on our way to the electric wire.

Also thanks for putting up with the various audio qualities. I'm still
learning the black magic of podcasting microphones. I have audio foam on
order and will be making a sound room this weekend. Hopefully things are
starting to get better.
