Immortal Halley! thy unwearied soul 
On Wisdom's pinion flew from pole to pole, 
The uncertain compass to its task restored, 
Each ocean fathom’d, and each wind explored, 
Commanded trade with every breeze to fly, 
And gave to Britain half the Zemblian sky. 
And see, he comes, distinguish’d, loved, caress'd, 
Mark'd by each eye, and hugg'd to every breast; 
His godlike labours wit and science fire, 
All factions court him, and all sects admire; 
While Britain, with a gratitude unknown 
To every age but Nero's and our own, 
A gratitude that will for ever shame 
The Spartan glory, and the’ Athenian name
Tell it, ye winds! that all the world may hear-
Bless'd his old age with-ninety pounds a year.
Are these our triumphs? these the sums we give
to ripen genius, and to bid it live?
Can britian in her fits of mandness pour
One half her Indies on a Roman whore,
And still permit the weeping Muse to tell
how poor neglected Desaguliers fell?
How he, who taught two gracious kings to view
All Boyle ennobled, and all Bacon knew,
Died in a cell, without a friend to save,
Without a guinea, and without a grave?

James Cawthorn, The Vanity Of Human Enjoyment, 1749.

18th century England threw so little cash toward science that even the poets were writing about it.

<intro>

Hello and welcome to computing history episode 1.5, the journey to the electric wire part deux.

In 1.3 we went over two, and now I'm showing my cards, carefully cherry picked publications by Stephen Gray; the first one involving children suspended by what he called hairlines and the second being a long line of thread being switchbacked to show that electricity follows the line all the way to its end.

We also talked about how Gray's experiments were really easy to reproduce, unlike say, Francis Hauksbee's air pump, a useful device we haven't talked about that was used to create a small ball without any air in it to run experiments in a vacuum, that is to say without an atmosphere to mess up your resultsw. The air pump was pretty useful but apparently quite costly to make. Many early scientists talked about having to borrow other people's pumps and that some of them were quite a bit better than others. Not with Gray though. Suspending someone with some thread? Totally doable. A long line of thread suspended by silk? Yes, that too.

So what happened?

That's right, people did it. Let's talk about one of them in particular, a chemist and superintendent of the royal garden who died of smallpox at the age of 40. Now if you think that sounded very French, you'd be right. The Parisian Charles François de Cisternay du Fay, inspired by the two experiments of Mr. Gray we spoke of last time, repeated them in Paris.

Many of his findings were reported in the French Academy of Sciences, which got completely dismantled in the French Revolution and replaced with something effectively the same about 2 years later, because, the french revolution. But that's still 50 years in the future.

If french is your thing you can read his 30 page article in Histoire de l'Académie Royale des Sciences published in 1733. There's a link to that article in the show notes.

And if French isn't your thing, Du Fay happened to have been kind enough to have written essentially the same findings in an english document in Philosophical Transactions.

The first replicated experiment we're going to talk about I didn't go over last time but when I read what Du Fay had to say about it I just couldn't leave it out.
Gray had run a number of experiments which really made it look like color had an influence in how something responded to electricity. For instance, Gray had suspended his boys by different color silks and then mesured how long they were able to "communicate the electric fire". He found a repeatable pattern of duration for the different colors.

Du Fay, fascinated by and somewhat suspicious of this finding, decided to try to simplify it as much as possible. He took 9 identical silk ribbons of different colors and then had a single glass tube that he brought near each of them at the same exact time, at the same exact distance. He noticed that the black one reacted first, every time. He rearranged the order of the ribbons and the results were the same. The black one first. After the black came the white and then an order of colors that always repeated itself. The color pattern roughly matched what Gray had found in his experiments.

Next Du Fay took pieces of colored cotton gauze and gold leaf and moved the gause pieces near the gold leaf and saw a different, but utterly repeatable pattern. This does sound like great evidence for color being related to electricity.

However, we all know, I think all of us do at least, that the color of something doesn't affect its electric properties. But how can we show that given this evidence, using only techiques available around say 1730?  If you'd like to think this through, press pause and come back and see if you can guess Du Fay's next experiment.

Alright, I hope you had a fun time thinking that through. Du Fay used a prism. He threw various colors of the prism on different pieces of white gause, and there was no difference in attraction when a specific color light shown on a particular piece of gause. Suspecting the source of the difference was chemical, he then warmed and wetted the gauses and silks and then saw the color differences go away. So he concludes "this difference proceeds not from the color but from the substances that are employed in the dying". Brilliant. He then used different methods of coloring such as charcoal and carmine, and showed that what Gray was observing was a property of the chemicals of the dye and not of their particular colors.

So Gray made a correct, repeatable observation, but drew from it the wrong conclusion. This is a great example of an important lesson in science: isolate the properties you hypothesize about and use multiple independent methods of experimentation. I'm excited by this example! Aren't you? Good, me too!

But wait, we're only 1/3 of the way through Du Fay's paper.  Next he does Gray's packthread line experiment but Du Fay has the idea that by wetting the thread he could get a better connection since a dry thread has a bunch of inconsistencies and tiny holes. Then using glass tubes instead of silk for better support, Du Fay makes 8 returns through a garden. He achieves Gray's results in 1256 feet in high winds. This is around twice what Gray did. 

Du Fay doesn't actually mention *which* garden he was using but I was curious since he worked at one for a living, owned by the king. Looking at his description, he said, 8 returns, crossed over 2 sidewalks, 1256 feet. So I looked up old maps of the royal garden and yes, there was an obvious long clearing about 160 feet wide crossing over 2 sidewalks so he probably did it at his office. It's cool Du Fay, I'm not going to run off and tell King Louis XIII, don't worry. 

By the way, the old map I used is called the Turgot Map of Paris, which wasn't made by Turgot, he's just the dude who paid for it. Louis Bretez, the actual guy who made it, was officially allowed to enter into people's homes and gardens to do two years of surveying between 1734 and 1736. Then he took 3 additional years to carefully draw his measurements and make this map. It exists in 20 sections that when assembled is 8 by 10 feet. You can find it online but it's about gigapixel and a gigabyte, which means you need to know what you're doing to browse it.  I made an easily zoomable and pannable version of the map and then I annotated with the places mentioned in this episode.  The link for you to view this fantastic isometric map 1730s Paris is at comphistpod.com. This is the paris with the narrow streets that got barricaded during the French Revolution, the street that were destroyed by Napoleon the 3rd and replaced with the boulevards that exist today, generally called the Haussman renovation of Paris. I hope you enjoy this giant picture of the past.

Moving on, Du Fay also suspended children and repeated Gray's experiments. But then he took it a step further and suspended himself by the silk lines as well. And I'm going to quote the next part to introduce something we haven't mentioned yet:

"while I am suspended on the lines, if the electric tube be put near one of my hands, or my legs, and then if another person approches me, [podcasters note, that other person he's referring to is Abbe Nollet who will be important later] ... anyway, another person approaches me and passes his hand within an inch of my face, legs, hand or cloathes, there immediately issues from my body one or more pricking shoots, with a crackling noise, that causes that person as well as my self, a little pain. Pain resembling that from the sudden prick of a pin, or the burning from a Spark of Fire...And in the dark, these snappings are, as may be easily imagined, so many sparks of fire" 

We have electric spark. Now this isn't the first time electric spark had been observed. We had Robert Boyle's glow in the dark diamond in 1663 and Otto Guericke's sulfur globe in 1672, Dr. William Wall rubbing sulfur and amber in 1708 and saying it looks like lightning (good job!), All of these things I'm saving for later ... but either way it's always nice to see another spark and this is the first time we're mentioning them here.

Du Fay next talks about two distinct electricities, very different from one another. The first one he calls vitreous, which means "glass-like". The other one he calls "resinous" referring the resin cakes the experimenters were frequently standing on. He then notes that vitreous electrics, such as glass, rock-crystal and wool repel other vitreous electrics while resinous, such as amber, silk, and paper, repels other resinous. And that vitreous and resinous charged things attract each other. Two electrified silks will repel, two woolen threads will repel, but a silk and a wool, those attract. 

There's even more but really, we just collected everything we came for so we must move on.

We now return to London to visit our old friend Dr. Desaguliers. It's around about 1736 or so and Stephen Gray has passed on. Desaguliers was a great scientist sure, but as we'll be seeing, this is one of the first real ages of the celebrity scientist, like say Neil deGrasse Tyson or Carl Sagan.  These scientists are more importantly evangelists of science who spread the findings, practice, and value of scientific inquiry.

Desaguliers main contribution is his division of objects into electrics and non-electrics, what we today call insulators and conductors. I know calling an electric an insulator sounds backwards but it's correct. The insulators, by many of the early theories were the things that "reacted" to electricity while the non-electrics "moved it along". Desaguliers also started working on the second English language book concerning electricity, which I briefly mentioned in 1.3 - the first being by Boyle in 1675 who I've decided to really not mention at all. Without the electricity evangelists like Desaguliers we wouldn't have gotten things like the Scots Magazine article about 15 years later.

These interesting experiments continued to be documented and spread and by the late 1730s, the Germans were getting in on the action. Now for all the history nerds out there, yes, there technically is no Germany yet. And for the rest of you, Germany in the 1700s is a complete mess, you have the holy roman empire, saxony, bavaria, the austrian netherlands, hanover, brandenburg, and oh yeah, the hungarians had a good chunk of things as well ... Instead of trying to get any of this correct, when we talk about the scientists of central europe we're going to use whatever nationality english texts of the time referred to them as. I think that's fair. Same things go with the Italians, which is even messier. In fact, the two little enclaves of San Marino and Vatican City still haven't hopped on the Italian unification train.

The Germans, as a whole, occupied themselves with trying to get a more fervent and strong electric spark. As an aside, I know I just made a sweeping generalization. The generalization was made in Bakewell's 1853 text, Mottelay 1922, Priestley 1769, maybe it's not how we'd treat it in the 21st century but let's go with it for now. Germans equals giant sparks. Besides, I'm setting you up for something here so trust me. 

The first German we'll talk about is Boze outside of Hamburg in the north who invented the first "prime conductor", essentially a mechanism for accumulating and temporarily storing charge. Don't worry if you've never heard "prime conductor" before, it essentially exited the english language as an electrical term by about 1920. Boze used globes and cylinders to accumulate the charge, the history of which we could go into with Otto Von Guericke and Hauksbee, but let's just say there is a mechanical process, a utilization of the electric and non-electric combinations, and a way to accumulate charge. Alright, Mr Winkler of Liepzig came up with another machine for the automated rubbing of the tubes we've been talking about and the globes, which we just talked about. His machine spun the globe at 180 rotations per minute via a hand crank using  gear ratios.

The british followed suit. They weren't satisfied with just one of these machines at a time though. Abbe Nollet, yeah there he is, worked with someone named Dr. Watson, who will be kinda important to our story, they proceeded to shock themselves so much that they bled. They noticed how the blood when electrified would spurt out in strange and unusual ways... they even killed small animals with the electricity and documented how they died ... one of them even used a 250 yard iron line and knocked small animals that landed on it off for diversion ... you know, this is kinda gross. we don't need to go into this. Let's see 250 yard iron line is about 750 feet ... ok, that's Gray's distance, yeah, not needed.

Well actually is is, or at least it will be. You see, this sounds like it's getting out of hand, people shocking themselves in a way that would knock them on their feet, machines with cranks that was designed to get to some high level of charge in a way that sounds pretty dangerous but I promise, this is pocket change in comparison to what's coming next.

And because suspense supposedly makes a good story, let's just make you wait until next time as we instead mosey on through other things the Germans did. Remember in 1.1 how we mentioned CM's bells where every letter was a different tone and the bells would be playing instead of words? Well the germans at this time are the ones who came up with that - ok the guy was a Scottish Catholic monk named Andrew Gordon but he worked in Germany because he was a Scottish catholic and this is the 1700s. Along with Gordon's chimes, he is also credited with the first electric motor, well, a device that spun on its own using electricity.

Another thing we get during this time is essentially a user-friendly version of the flying boy experiment. Hausen from Leipzig constructed a number of machines, described by Watson, and used throughout Amsterdam and a small city called Leyden, where you'd have someone hanging by threads, another person on the rosin, then they would touch the spinning globe to build up the charge ... rinse wash and repeat stephen grey. I can imagine this at an 18th century carnival where two people go up, pay a small fee, get a couple shocks, light some things on fire with their fingers ... oh wait, that actually kinda happened and happens to be the entire topic of the next episode along with that thing I'm cautiously saving.

Ok so skipping over next time's fun parts we're going to be like an old movie where they just did a cutaway and kinda explained things later. Bam, we have a leyden jar from that city I just mentioned. This device was essentially the first capacitor. It could hold charge, a lot of charge. But more importantly for us, it's about the size of a decent indoor flower pot and could be transported around. 

Getting shocked with one of these was notoriously unpleasant. And there's a couple decades where scientists are voluntarily doing it to run various tests on electricity. 

The leyden jar meant you could use your German electricity accumulation machine built around a "prime conductor" to charge your magical leyden jar and then as long as you didn't break one simple rule you could relatively safely discharge electricity wherever you pleased. This was a great tool for electrical experimentation. Also, it's a rather trivial device to create and unlike say, the air pump machines, a lot of precision and careful maintenance was not required for it to be effective.

So merely a year after its introduction, by 1746, you had a number of interesting findings already. On Nov 12, 1746 Louis-Guillaume Le Monnier spoke at the Royal Academy of Sciences in Paris concerning his latest findings. These were then transcribed in December in English to Philosophical Transactions. This first notable thing he describes is a wire about 2000 french toises, that is to say a paris league, or near two english miles and a half, with some of it dragged on wet grass and ground newly ploughed up. But he still got a connection, so yeah, electricity traversed over 2 miles.

Le Monnier also did an experiment over what he called the Bason of the Thuilleries which is a giant fountain, well more of a reflection pond, that still exists in the Tuileries garden, this is in the super touristy part of Paris, near arc de triomphe so you may even have a photo of this thing if being a tourist in Paris is something you've done. It's also annotated on the map I talked about before.  His purpose here was to try to find out more about how electricity is propagated and distributed. 

So the diameter of this pond is about as wide as a jumbo jet wingspan, about 205 feet, just so we know what we're dealing with. We go to Le Monnier's text, "there was stretched around half the circumference of the bason, an iron chain, which was entirely out of the water". Now there's two people standing across from each other, pond in between. They are holding the chain. One of them has his hand in the water and the other one has one of these oh so dangerous leyden jars and what's he doing here? he has a yes, iron rod fixed to some cork which is floating on top of the pond. Now if he touches the leyden jar upon the iron rod, and no shock happens, that means the water is not closing the circuit. If he touches the rod with the leyden jar and they both receive a shock, then the electricity goes over the wire. Let's see what happens. Both men get violently shocked. Success.

Turns out there's other, smaller fountains at the Thuilleries as well, at the other end of the park. So just to confirm, Le Monnier did the experiment at both the smaller fountains, simultaneously, just to see if the humans conducting the experiments introduced any variations.

Anyway, this is probably another something we could try to recreate, like the fishing pole from the monument to great fire of london I suggested in 1.3, on second thought, let's not.

And finally on trying to determine the speed of electricity, instead of 200 monks, Le Monnier used a mile of wire and himself to complete the circuit. After repeatedly shocking himself, he concluded electricity moved far too fast for him to measure, not even a quarter second had passed until he felt the shock. From this he infers a velocity "at least 30 times the speed of sound". 

And Le Monnier he concludes "given the swiftness of the electric effluvia, it would be quite suitable to build machines of computation based on its propagation" -- I kid I kid, that last part absolutely did not happen. We've got quite a long way to go.

Back in London, Watson does a series of several meetings in 1747 resulting in a 72 page article. Our journey to the electric wire is almost complete, or was Le Monnier essentially our destination? 

Anyway, I'm going to leave out some of Watson's wordiness and quote him follow:

"This Circuit is always described in the shortest manner possible; but if the components conduct differently, this circuit is always formed through the best conductor, however great its length is"
Moving on...
"Metals conduct best the electrical powers. Water likewise is an admirable Conductor; for the electrical power makes no difference between solids and fluids as such but only as they are non-electric matter"

Keeping with the theme of "copy and expand" experimentation, Watson essentially copies Le Monnier's experiments I previously described

So Watson also tried to replicate Le Monnier's pond. But just like with the wire, he decided to do this one also on a grander scale. So grand that it kinda got the best of him.

So the Thames river, if you've never been to London, I forgive you. It goes right through the center of town. In fact, it's more like London was built on the Thames than the Thames happening to have gone through London. This is kinda how old cities worked. For instance, Cambridge. There's a river cam and someone made a bridge. In fact most of the old buildings in Cambridge aren't facing the roads but the river as that was a more reasonable way to get around back in the day. So take one of the boat tours if you ever find yourself in Cambridge. Really.

Anyway, back to the river Thames in London. To understand a bit more about this experiment, I'll have to oh so briefly crack open the 18th century electromagnetic theory books. Du Fay thought electricity was a fluid and operated like other fluids. You could possibly dilute it, concentrate it, heat it and cool it. This isn't a terrible idea. If something is statically charged, you can rub the property off. If you heat or cool something it has different electrical properties. You can certainly accumulate charge and the size of the things you use look like they bare some relation to things. So given the evidence up to this time, it wasn't a totally crazy idea.

So we have to walk into this thinking "Electricity, yeah, it's a really strange fluid". So now we can get into Watson's paragraph:

"it was conjectured, as no circuit had as yet been found large enough so to dissipate the electrical power as not to make it perceptible (again, assuming this is how things worked), an observer might be made sensible of the electrical commotion quite across the river thames, by the communication of no other medium than the water of the river."

So the idea here was "ok, so we assume electricity is a fluid, Le monnier used a couple fountains and it was felt across those fountains, fine. But what if we use a 5,000 square mile river?"

And of course I'm bringing this up because it wasn't just an intellectual exercise. He wanted to draw conclusions from the facts themselves, it was determined to make the experiment.

So Watson picked a place near the Bridge at Westminster, let me give the setup. The river at this place is about 1200 feet across, which makes it about a 4 minute walk if you're Jesus, probably about the time it takes for you to get to your nearest store if you live in a city.

So instead of wrapping a chain around a fountain, Watson strung a line across the bridge and then draped it down on either end to the shoreline.

Then they repeated Le Monniers experiment, iron rod, leyden jar, etc. They used 3 people by breaking up the task of the leyden jar and the iron rod into the water ... but same idea.

They tried to do the experiment multiple times but it attracted a bit of attention, as Watson says, again paraphrasing for brevity:

"The Gentlemen Present being much molested in their operation by a great concourse of people, who many times Broke the conducting wire and otherwise greatly inconvenienced them, and the evening growing too dark for the observers on different sides of the water to see each other they could only consider these trials as an encouragement to come back at a more favorable opportunity"

I'd like to imagine a bunch of drunken blokes on the bridge heckling the royal society "hey admiral, what are you doing down on the water? What's that you got in your hand there? What's this line here? Do you need to use this? Can I help you out here?"

So they repeated the experiments again early Saturday morning and faced no harrassment from onlookers. Watson proceeded to do many variations of this at thie river and another one, the New River, near Stoke-Newington, way out in the boonies.

Before we move on let's talk about two things.

First the British did their own knockoff version of the Turgot Map of Paris, but for London because of course they did. This british one, named John Rocque's Map of London is from 1746 and is 24 sheets expanding to 6 by 12 feet. It took him 6 years, he used some primitive surveying equipment and it was a pretty financially shakey endevour. This map is also placed in the show notes, annotated, with the British events for your perusal.

And second, there's an interesting engraving of the Watson experiments in Scientific American from October 1889 that I just happened to have posted in the show notes. The first thing you'll notice is the artist imagined 3 boats that simply were not there and carried the wire across the boats and not the bridge.  

The themes of the 18th century and why they are so fun to talk about are that the experiments were mostly clever, cheap, fast, easy, reliable and easily replicable. This is core hacker ethic and its how empires of pure thoughtstuff get built. There's this drive to dignify things by trying to complicate them and make them look like they had pomp and grandeur. 

Nonsense, these are hackers. We really need to fight that tendency, it's been going on too long.

Back to Watson, he also set about trying to find the speed of electricity as Le Monnier had. He did this experiment at a place called Shooter's Hill, which supposedly got its name because it was a strategic place for archers to be in the middle ages. London is pretty flat and Shooter's Hill is one of the highest points there, at 433 feet. For comparison if you've ever been to about 40 stories and looked out the window, that's about the viewing distance we're talking about - so it's pretty good. In fact you can web search for "shooters hill view" and get some nice pictures of london. 

So Shooters Hill. Watson is there with 12 other people including two people from the Royal Academy of Sciences of Berlin. The experiment is to make a 2 mile electric circuit, the longest we've seen up to this point. At the midpoint they'd have an observer detect how long it would take for the electricity to arrive after it was applied at the other end.

How would he detect it? Well this is the 1740s so he'd hold the wires of course, one in each hand, and the observer would be the thing completing the circuit. Then people would be watching for him to convulse in shock by being electrocuted and see if there's a noticable delay between the two events. Yes, this is what we are doing. Over a dozen people most of which who have PhDs including the countries leading astronomer, the president of the royal society ... here's what we're doing today. Alright.

So they set about the experiment using silk suspended from wooden stakes and switchbacks of exposed iron wire criss-crossing back and forth down a field with each return measuring about 2 city blocks long (Watson claims 726 feet).

So it took them all day and by nightfall they made sure that the wire wasn't touching the wood because the dew would lead to moisture and, I quote Watson "the electrical circuit might be shortened" or what we would call "a short circuit" so modern terminology is starting to develop.

Anyway, the next morning they now had a Leyden jar, or what they called a "Leyden phial" at the time, zig zagging wires traversing down a field and a small space for a brave volunteer to go over and hold the two ends.  Watson refers to these volunteers as just "men" which makes me think that none of his scholarly entourage was willing to take the hit for science. Anway let's quote Watson:

"When all parts of the apparatus were properly disposed, several explosions of the charged phial were made; and it was invariably seen (podcasters note, this means they did it a bunch of times), that the Observer holding in each Hand one of the extremeties of these wires was convulsed in both his arms in the instant of making the Explosions!"

He did another variation where he had 4 men, holding hands, and two on either end holding the wire just to make sure there's not like some kind of human difference in electric convulsion. Watson excitedly writes: "They were all seen convulsed in the instant of the explosion. Every one who felt it complained of the severity of the shock". 

What an 18th century way to refer to people screaming expletives. This experiment was repeated by Winckler in Leipzig and in 1795 by someone who will play a role later, Betancourt, who did a 26 mile variation during a 2 year stint in London.

And next we're going to go over why this podcast is days late. This is me breaking the 4th wall. Let's go to "Bibliographical History Of Electricity And Magnetism" from 1922 by Paul Mottelay, midway through page 175, and I quote:

"Watson, in 1745, proves that the electric fluid takes the shortest course, passing through the substance of the best medium of connection and not along its surface.  This, he demonstrated by discharging a phial through a wire covered with a mixture of wax and resin."

And there it is. That looks like our first insulated wire.  When I read this I thought "ok, great, I'll do a two episode arc, work up to this point, leave it off with Watson, tie a nice bow on things and then move on."

But here's the problem. I couldn't find the original source. As you can tell, source material is the modus operandi of this podcast and I was not going to claim such a significant piece of our puzzle based on a secondary source from 1922.

Mottelay lists literally 50 references for that 2 page section on Waton/1745. I read through all of them. That was on a Saturday, over about 16 hours. The description of a wire with wax and resin in 1745 is in none of them. So I went back on Sunday just to make sure, it wasn't. So on Monday I looked for where Mottelay could have gotten this idea. I started searching essentially small phrases around his claim to see if the words came up elsewhere maybe with some other references attached, this is after all, a bibliographical history. The only thing I found was that Mottelay kinda lifted a sentence from the 1841 Encyclopedia Brittanica article on electricity without citing it.

I continued searching but then I found an error in Mottelay's citations! I believe he erroneously cited "Experiments and Observations on Electricity", 1745 when what he mant to cite was "Experiments and Observations Tending to Illustrate the Nature and Properties of Electricity", 1746 - these are two different books, so I read both of them. But after a few more days of futile searching I found lots of insulation, lots of wires, some of them insulated for the terms of an experiment but still nobody saying "hey now here's a useful thing" - after an experiment that involved insulating a wire, a few years later, the same scientist would be off draping bare iron lines over silk in a field. What the heck!? They didn't stick with it.

So I'm going to say something really bold here: Mottelay made that line up. "Now just because you can't find it" you finger wag at me "doesn't mean it doesn't exist."

Ok, sure. But look, there's many references on how to insulate the leyden jar itself with wax, resin, and numerous other materials. Many authors discribed insulation techniques for the prime conductors of globes and cylinders to isolate and focus their charge as well. In 1737 there's a paper describing a rod of iron with sealing wax as a supporter and the electricity passing through it as an observation on what electricity does and does not pass through.

In "The Philosophical Transactions" abridgement for 1743 to 1750, edited by John Martin, there's this description on page 276:

"a small glass tube is fixed, thro' which an iron wire,  reaches to the middle of the glass
vessel, an exceeding small space being between the vessel and the wire.
The tube and the wire are so strongly cemented with sealing-wax, that
no air can penetrate."

So there's your insulated wire, a few inches of it at least. This all sounds like the people of the time could readily create insulated wires if they wanted to. They certainly knew how. The only conclusion then, is that they didn't want to and didn't value it. But isn't bare wire kinda unstable, dangeous even? Doesn't weather affect it? How could it be that they didn't want it?

Well, there was no real use-case of a network of stable wires carrying electricity that needed to stick around for months or years. There were no practical electrical devices in the 1700s. There was also no way to give consistent continuous power, so there was no reason to carefully insulate things. Wires were used to conduct experiments or do brief demonstration and then people would pack up and leave.

The only thing our 18th century electricians really cared about was not inadvertantly shocking themselves when they weren't planning on it. There were many insulation methods for achieving that.  In 1767, CL Epinasse even provided a recipe in 
"Description of an Improved Apparatus for Performing Electrical Experiments, in Which the Electrical Power is Increased, the Operator Intirely Secured from Receiving Any Any Accidental Shocks, and the Whole Rendered More Convenient for Experiments Than Heretofore"

Here, let's read his recipe. Feel free to do this at home,

Take 4lb of Venice turpentine, 1lb of resin, and 1lb of bee's wax; boil these over a gentle fire, stirring them now and then for about six hours, at the end of which, stir in a quarter of a pound of vermilion: then, a little of the mixture should be taken out and left to cool, will be hard and brittle; a token that it is fit for use. Having well heated your globe or cylinder, pour the remaining melted mixture into it ; turn the cylinder about so as to spread it evenly over the inside surface to the thickness of a sixpence, and let it cool very gradually."

So there, step by step insulation, just not for wires yet.

The recommendations to this for actual wires started appearing in the late 1700s and early 1800s as applications for a stable installation of electricity became necessary. 

So second big lesson this episode: people with modern eyes will so desperately want to see something that really, in the context of the historical times, didn't make much sense. Insomuch as when this notable scholar, namely Mottelay, made this claim, I spent multiple days looking for it, still believed it just had to be there somewhere, but then after accumulating a mountain of evidence I was forced to concede that it was simply contemporary projection.

So the electrical wire is here and done, let's say by Le Monnier it was complete, sure. Of course the stable electric network fit for continuous is still far off in the future. So everything is here but the reasons to use it.

So does that mean we're done today?

ALMOST. As I'm dedicated to concluding 18th century experimentations with electromagnetic theory with this episode there's still one name I need to mention. It's the founder of the University of Pennsylvania, the diplomat, statesman, writer, philosopher, politician, scientist, inventor, fireman? fireman I guess so, let's see, printer, minister to france and sweden? the first postmaster general and the 6th president of pennsylvania? Wow, anyway, I'm sure you've figured it out, this overachiever is Benjamin Franklin.

I feel basically obligated to talk about Benjamin Franklin. Well Kind of. Just like Watson duplicated LeMonnier, Franklin duplicated Watson. He too had Leyden Jars but he was electrocuting new world animals like wild turkeys. He too did Watson's river experiments. He was yet another copycatter and extender in the same way that people take open source software and modify it for their own needs, the code of science of the time was open access, nobody owned it, and everyone encouraged duplication and expansion. Whether you're Joseph Franz of Vienna, Boze of Berlin, French, British, or American ... there's even a Japanese replication of Abbe Nollet's 200 monk experiment by Sokichi Hashimoto (and there's a depiction of that in the show notes as well).

Benjamin Franklin is a super important figure in the timeline of electricity. We've all heard the story of him 
flying the kite with the key in the lightning storm when we were children and you can be forgiven if you just filed this away with Washington's Cherry Tree and Johnny Appleseed as fun stories we tell children. I forgive you as well. 

But it's time to refile that now. Franklin won the Copley medal, the same one that Desaguliers and Gray won, for his work on Electricity. He did a number of publications in Philosophical Transactions concerning electricity. He had 17 publications in the journal in fact, a highly respectable number seeing as I could never in my wildest dreams even fathom getting just 1.  Franklin's electricity work is so important, in fact, that texts written before the American Revolution on the history of Electricity, such as say The History and Present State of Electricity, with Original Experiments, by Joseph Priestley, from 1769, Franklin's experiments in Philadelphia play pivotal roles.  For instance, Priestly title's Chapter 8 as "The history of electricity from the discovery of the Leyden phial in the years 1745 and 1746, till Dr. Franklin's Discoveries' and then writes all of Chapter 9 about Franklin, and concludes the book about the new ways people looked at electricity in a post Franklin world. Now remember, this is before the American Revolution, 1769, these aren't people star struck by his politics doing classical mythmaking.

So after all that praise, we are actually going to skip right over Franklin because we're focused exclusively on our journey to a working telegraph and Franklin doesn't actually play a role in that story. Don't worry, he will pop up again in later series. Also, I'm at episode 5 of a computing history podcast and still stuck in the 1750s. I do actually intend on eventually getting to things like strowger switches and reed relays, designed in the 1930s for telephone switches and arguably the first computer memory, sometime before an expanding sun swallows the earth. 

Alright ok fine, one thing about Franklin. Franklin greatly expanded upon Du Fay's observation of vitreous and resinous electricity and felt forced to give them a more generalized name, one that we still use today: positive, and negative. Well kinda. Watson used a plus and minus in diagrams for simplicity purposes and Franklin was like "ok, that makes sense. Positive and Negative it is!" Sorry DuFay, your resinous and vitreous came and went in a single episode.

So here we are, reliable as intended, insulated when neede, electric wires going over multiple miles. This discovery will exhibit a pattern we'll see repeatedly, the time between discovery and the introduction of a so-called killer app, a term coined in a 1988 issue of Pc Week, it's the thing that chaparones a technology from a toy to a tool - a practical goal made easier by the technology. This is also the distinction that David Davidow in his 1986 text, "Marketing High Technology" made between a device and a product, let me quote him:

"Thousands of devices are invented every year...all the marketing hype in the world can't create a product unless a device exists. But the key is to convert great devices into great products.

Everyone knows what a product is. A product is the totality of what a customer buys. When a device is properly augmented so that it can be easily used by a customer it becomes a product"

We have the devices of electricity and wires, the separation between positive and negative, conductor and insulator, but no product has yet emerged. The time period between device and product is that of the enthusiast and hobbyist. It's the time before the first spreadsheet when people assembled personal computers from kits as a pasttime and spent their weekends working on them at enthusiast clubs.

So next time we will go into the era when electricity was merely a pasttime and party trick before the first product of the electric era emerged.

Yes that means we're done for real now. Phew, I'm so exhuasted. Excuse me while I go take a nap.

Oh one last thing, the brief French voices were provided by my brother in-law Matthew Henderson and my father, Jim McKenzie when I recently visited him to celebrate his 70th birthday. Happy birthday dad!

<outro>
